---
title: Why Zig?
---

Last year I learned Zig for [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/) as part of an ongoing tradition to solve the puzzles in a different programming language each year. Sometimes I pick a language I'm relatively comfortable with (Clojure, Go) because I don't get a chance to work with it as often as I would like. Other years, I pick a language that I have little/no experience with (Zig, Nim, Julia, Rust), to see what it's all about.

I don't think Zig is actually a particularly good fit for solving these kinds of puzzles, but what really impressed me is how expressive and elegant it can be, considering its simple semantics and low level programming model.

I actually enjoyed writing Zig so much for the daily puzzles that I started a few Zig [side projects](https://github.com/danprince/zigrl), as an excuse to dive deeper into some aspects of the language that are less important when writing puzzle solutions.

Here's what I think Zig gets right, in no particular order.

## Testing
Zig belongs to the sensible class of languages that recognise testing as part of the language, not the ecosystem, with dedicated syntax and built-in tools for testing.

Running `zig test` will run all tests that specified in your [build.zig](https://ziglang.org/learn/overview/#zig-build-system) or you can run `zig test file.zig` to test a specific file.

Running those tests involves executing `test` blocks in the appropriate source files.

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const testing = std.testing;

test "examples" {
    try testing.expectEqual(2, 1 + 1);
}
```

The [testing namespace](https://ziglang.org/documentation/master/std/#root;testing) in the standard library contains everything you need to write assertions when comparing all sorts of values, pointers, optionals, and errors.

It also contains a custom allocator that will report memory leaks. This is actually a big deal, as Zig's manual memory management means every single allocation and free is explicit. So long as you are writing tests, `std.testing.allocator` makes sure that you don't forget to free memory, which eliminates a significant class of bugs.

These tests can also (and should regularly) be used inline within source files. They become an invaluable source of compiler-checked documentation and examples.

I have a bit of a gripe with the argument ordering of the assertion functions. Here's the definition of `expectEqual` straight out of the source for Zig v0.11.0:

```zig
pub fn expectEqual(expected: anytype, actual: @TypeOf(expected)) !void {
```

Unlike most languages, the `expected` value comes second, which can make writing tests feel like ["Yoda conditions"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yoda_conditions). There are [reasons for this](https://github.com/ziglang/zig/issues/4437) but I often forget to swap the arguments and I'm now used to reading the output backwards.

Unfortunately `zig test` does not support a watch mode, so I usually configure `zig test` as [my default test task in VSCode](https://github.com/danprince/zigrl/blob/e75c5d02b99ea78bfb3abbe1069a305b9c5c7cee/.vscode/tasks.json#L29-L46), which I bind to a keyboard shortcut, making it easy to run my tests from anywhere in the project.

## Control Flow
In many programming languages there's an _apparent_ control flow. Code moves from statement to statement, going through loops, and only jumping away when functions are called. In most programming languages there's also a _hidden_ control flow. Exceptions can halt execution when something further up the stack throws. Syntatic overloads can result in calls out to user defined routines. The worst offenders are usually macros, because there's really no telling what might happen when you call those.

That _hidden_ control flow stuff? Zig doesn't have any of it. Function calls are the only time that you have to think about the consequences of ending up in a new stack frame. This allows you to rule out a whole class of possibilities when you are debugging. It forces you to design more explicit interfaces and to rely less on language level magic that might not be obvious to less experienced programmers.

## Error Handling
Rather than having dedicated control flow for exceptions, Zig uses first class errors values that functions can return. There are a few languages that use a similar model but there's an important distinction; Zig's compiler recognises error unions as a separate _kind_ of value.

Let's look at Go—another language which uses errors-as-values—to understand the difference.

```go
func random() (float64, error) {
    // ...
}
```

This `random` function returns two values and the second one happens to be an error. There's nothing to stop you from swapping the return signature, and error-last is just a convention. The compiler doesn't recognise a semantic difference from returning two floats, so it can't help enforce the pattern.

It's up to the caller to recognise the error value and to handle it accordingly.

```go
val, err := random();

if err != nil {
  // ...
}
```

This pattern is brilliantly simple, but it adds an additional 3+ lines of code almost every  time you call a function that may return an error. This contributes to a general level of noise in some functions. Here's [an example](https://github.com/danprince/sietch/blob/f774913e188c92b54e15022fcd9cf8d5b554691f/internal/builder/builder.go#L142-L207) from one of my own Go codebases.

Here's how the same signature would look in Zig.

```zig
fn random() !f64 {
    // ...
}
```

The `!` in the signature tells us that the function can return error value _or_ a floating point value. There's no convention here, if your function can fail, the error value must be encoded into the return type.

Callers don't have to worry about unpacking multiple values and checking them individually. Instead they receive a single value that can be an error _or_ a value. This might not seem particularly impressive if you've used languages with union types but it really shines with control flow primitives that are explicitly designed to work with error unions.

`if` statements have capturing behaviour that can unwrap error unions.

```zig
if (random()) |val| {
  // val is an f64
} else |err| {
  // err is an error
}
```

`catch` statements give you a chance to provide an default value without a full control flow branch.

```zig
const number = random() catch 42;
```

And `try` is a shortcut for returning the error from inside a catch branch.

```zig
try random();
// is equivalent to writing
// random() catch |err| return err;
```

Propagating errors in Zig adds very little noise, especially considering that it is manual and explicit; there are no exceptions or recoverable panics.

Because the compiler recognises errors, it can manage their stack traces as they make their way back down the stack. The error remembers where it came from without needing to be manually wrapped along the way.

When error handling is too explicit in a programming language, it becomes tedious and people look for ways to avoid or abstract it. On the other hand, when error handling is too implicit then people forget to do it.

Zig strikes a great blend between explicit errors and pragmatic simplicity, with the  best model for error handling and optional values that I've ever used in a programming language.

## Standard Library
To talk about the standard library properly, we have to talk about generics. Fortunately, Zig's generics are one of the most interesting things about the language.

In other languages you might be used to parameterising types and function calls with an angle bracket syntax. For example `ArrayList<number>` might define an array of numbers. In Zig, this would be `ArrayList(f64)`.

This isn't a special syntax exception. This is just a function call. Types can be passed around like any other parameters.

You see this pattern throughout the standard library. For example, the `std.mem` namespace is largely made up of functions that operate on arrays, but because Zig accepts types as parameters, there is no need for function overloading.

Aside from the novel compile time implementation, generics are nothing new, but they can still be a controversial aspect of language design. There are plenty of high profile languages that don't implement them, or overcomplicate them. For me, Zig finds a near perfect balance in the middle.

Zig offers a solid set of generic data structures including hash maps, array lists, sets/bitsets, priority queues, tail queues, and bloom filters. For a low level language, this is impressive, and goes a long way towards the front page claim that "Zig is a general-purpose programming language".

For application level programming, Zig still falls a long way short of a language like Go, which provides much higher level interfaces for working with HTTP, SQL, regular expressions, templating languages, image processing, and more out of the box.

Currently, the documentation for the standard library isn't good. The official documentation even has a big red banner which acknowledges this and suggests that you read the standard library's source code instead. This will be a dealbreaker for some people, and fair enough. If you decide to persevere then you'll find that the standard library is an idiomatic codebase, clearly written, well commented, and full of inline tests that serve as examples.

Any editor with support for language server protocols should make it a one step process to jump to the definition of any type or function from the standard library, and quickly hopping backwards and forwards between my own code and library code has been an invaluable part of learning the language.

## Containers
Syntatic blocks like structs can hold their own variable and function declarations. This seemed a little arbitrary to me at first. Here's a struct that has two properties:

```zig
const Vec = struct {
    x: f64,
    y: f64,
};
```

No surprises here. Things get interesting when we introduce declarations alongside those properties.

```zig
const Vec = struct {
    x: f64,
    y: f64,

    fn of(x: f64, y: f64) Vec {
        return .{ .x = x, .y = y };
    }

    fn size(v: Vec) Vec {
      return std.math.hypot(f64, v.x, v.y);
    }
};
```

We can refer to these functions as static member of `Vec`.

```zig
const v = Vec.of(1, 2);
```

And we can refer to them as members on instances of `Vec` (so long as the types line up)!

```zig
const size = Vec.of(1, 2).size();
```

This is probably the most sensible implementation of static members and methods that I remember seeing. It not limited to structs either. Enums, unions, and opaques are also [containers](https://ziglang.org/documentation/master/#Containers).

Here's a real example from Advent of Code.

```zig
const Sign = enum {
    rock,
    paper,
    scissors,

    fn parse(ch: u8) Sign {
        return switch (ch) {
            'A', 'X' => .rock,
            'B', 'Y' => .paper,
            'C', 'Z' => .scissors,
            else => unreachable,
        };
    }

    fn score(sign: Sign) u32 {
        return switch (sign) {
            .rock => 1,
            .paper => 2,
            .scissors => 3,
        };
    }
}
```

If Zig didn't support containers, then these complementary functions would probably need some manual namespacing (for example `parseSign` and `scoreSign`) to prevent collisions with functions from other types in the same scope.

## Everything Else
This wasn't supposed to be a deep dive on Zig, so here are some quick overviews on other things that I appreciate about the language.

- It comes with a built in formatter (`zig fmt`).
  - The formatter respects trailing commas when deciding whether to break lines.
- Testing and compiling is fast.
- Declaration privacy is module level (other code in the same file can read private properties of adjacent containers).
- Strong semantic consistency across declarations.
  - Everything is `const x = ...` (imports, structs, enums, type aliases, unions, error).
- Structs [can work as namespaces](https://github.com/danprince/zigrl/blob/e75c5d02b99ea78bfb3abbe1069a305b9c5c7cee/src/handler.zig#L19-L55).
- [Files are structs](https://zig.news/gowind/zig-files-are-structs-288j)
- Most syntactic constructs are expressions (for example `const x = if (true) 42 else 24`).
- Compiling Zig from source is [straightforward](https://github.com/ziglang/zig/wiki/Building-Zig-From-Source).
- The [language reference](https://ziglang.org/documentation/master/) is high-quality and generally interesting to read.
- Creating a compile time distinction between [pointers and many-pointers](https://ziglang.org/documentation/0.10.0/#Pointers) removes a whole class of problems.
- There is no [variable shadowing](https://ziglang.org/documentation/0.10.0/#Shadowing). This removes another significant class of subtly confusing problems.
- It's relatively easy to compile to WebAssembly and interface with JavaScript code in a browser ([example project](https://github.com/danprince/zig-wasm-life)).
- Using Zig to configure Zig through `build.zig` is one of those great ideas that is one part obvious and one part genius.
- The community is approachable, friendly, and active. The Zig Discord server is a good place to ask questions and see what's going on across the language.

## Rough Edges
Zig isn't a mature or particularly stable programming language yet (sometimes it seems like everyone is working off of Zig's `master` branch) even if it is heading in the right direction. Alongside the praise, it's important to recognise some of the pain points that I struggled with too.

- There's no concept of interfaces or generic type constraints and the workarounds ([1](https://ethanfrei.com/posts/zig-interfaces.html), [2](https://zig.news/kilianvounckx/zig-interfaces-for-the-uninitiated-an-update-4gf1), [3](https://www.nmichaels.org/zig/interfaces.html)) aren't intuitive.
- A general lack of blog posts and Stack Overflow questions means that googling often isn't  helpful. You have to get comfortable reading the source.
- Generated documentation isn't good. You have to get comfortable reading the source.
- Some compiler errors are still rough to interpret and action. I even managed to crash the compiler itself once or twice.
- Segmentation faults can be hard to track down at runtime if you can't isolate them in tests.
- Compile time programming errors don't have the kinds of stack traces you might expect, making it hard to track down mistakes in calls to functions like `std.debug.print`.
- I wasn't able to get breakpoints and a step-debugger working inside my editor. Might just be unfamiliarity with LLDB on my part.
- The editor support is generally a bit patchy.
  - It took quite a lot of work to get ZLS working with VSCode.
  - Some errors aren't detected and highlighted until I manually compile.
  - Some errors are detected by the compiler, but never in the editor.
  - Some code paths have working intellisense and others don't.
  - Code that depends on a compile time branch doesn't work with intellisense.

## When?
I don't write low level programs enough to remember all the footguns of a language like C, or all of the complexities of a language like Rust. Zig fits comfortably in the middle, with semantics that are easy to approach and easy to remember.

I think Zig is a great language for people who are interested in exploring lower level programming without a steep barrier to entry. This will be especially true as the language continues to smooth out the rough edges mentioned above.
